---
puzzleId: 1020
title: "Color Switches"
difficulty: "hard"
category: "probability"
---

## Question
You are given an urn with 100 balls (50 black and 50 white). You pick balls from urn one by one without replacements until all the balls are out. A black followed by a white or a white followed by a black is "a colour change". Calculate the expected number of colour-changes if the balls are being picked randomly from the urn.

## Hint
Linearity of expectation

## Answer
50

## Solution
 Each time we draw, there could be a possible color-switch, except the first time we draw, hence 99 possible switches.

 Let $X_i$ be a random variable taking value 1 if $i_{th}$ position has a colour change and zero otherwise, note that $i$ goes from $1$ to $99$.

 Total number of changes, $S = X_1 + X_2 + ... + X_{99} = \sum_{i=1}^{99} X_i$

 The expected number of color changes is denoted by the sum of these variables, i.e $E[S] = E[X_1 + X_2 + ... + X_{99}]$

 Linearity of expectation states that the expected value of the sum of random variables is equal to the sum of their individual expected values.

 Hence the answer is $E[S] = E[X_1] + E[X_2] + ... + E[X_{99}]$ 

 Note that each $X_i$ is identical, and the expected value is equal for each $i$, i.e, $E(X_k) = E(X_1) $

 Hence $E[S] = E[X_1] + ... + E[X_n] = \sum_{i=1}^{99} E[X_1] = 99 * E[X_1] $

 Also, we can calculate the expected value, $E[X_1] = 1 * P(X_1 = 1) + 0 * P(X_1 = 0) = P(X_1 =1) $

 Probability of any given color change is (either first is R second is B, or first is B and second is R) $= P(X_1 = 1)= \dfrac{50}{100}*\dfrac{50}{99} + \dfrac{50}{100}*\dfrac{50}{99} = 50/99$

 Finally, the answer is $ E[S] = \sum_{i=1}^{99} E[X_i] = 99 * E[X_1] = 99 * 50/99 = 50$ 

 PS: $X_i$'s are not independent, but since all the balls are drawn randomly, the probability-distribution is identical for each draw. For instance, if you are given no information about the previous colors, and I ask 'what is the probability that 5th draw has a color change?', your answer will not depend on '5', instead the answer will be same for any index. 
