---
puzzleId: 14
title: "Monty Hall Problem"
difficulty: "easy"
category: "probability"
---

## Question
Suppose you're on a game show, and you're given the choice of three doors: Behind one door is a car; behind the others, goats. You pick a door, say No. 1, and the host, who knows what's behind the doors, opens another door, say No. 3, which has a goat. Now, do you want to pick door No. 2? What is the probability to win the car if you switch?

## Hint
The host always opens a door with a goat.

## Answer
2/3

## Solution
The probability that your initial choice did not have a car is indeed $2/3$.


**Initial Misstep**:
After one door is opened, there are exactly two doors left, and one of them has a car. So the probability that the car is behind either door is $1/2$.
This is incorrect because the host knows which door has a car and which door has a goat. The host always opens a door with a goat.

**Correct Solution**:
The following table shows which Door the host might open. Assume that the car is behind Gate #1, and we randomly choose one door.

| Initial choice: | &nbsp; Door #1 &nbsp; | &nbsp; Door #2 &nbsp; | &nbsp; Door #3 &nbsp; |
| --------------- | :-------------------: | :-------------------: | :-------------------: |
| Reality         |          Car          |         Goat          |         Goat          |
| Host opens:     |       #2 or #3        |          #3           |          #2           |
| Remaining:      |       #3 or #2        |          #1           |          #1           |
| Good to switch: |          No           |          Yes          |          Yes          |

We see that at the end, the remaining unopened door is Door #1 if we start with Door #2 or Door #3.
This means that in 2 out of 3 cases, we started with the incorrect Door (#2 or #3) and we got the option to switch with the correct door at the end (#1). 
<!-- So, if we always decide to switch to the last unopened door, we will win the car 2 out of 3 times. -->

<!-- Hence the probability to win by switching $= 2/3$ -->

So you should switch to the other door, and win the car with a probability of $2/3$

---

### Generalization

The probability of being initially wrong is the same as the probability of being correct after switching. We can generalize this to $n$ doors. 
The probability of winning the game by switching after the host has opened $n-2$ doors is $(1 - 1/n)$

---

### Script

Not convinced? Simulate using this
[Colab Script](https://colab.research.google.com/gist/varun-seth/e828928baefdfd503548bef522c15a7b/14_monty_hall.ipynb#sandboxMode=true)

