---
puzzleId: 18
title: "100 Light bulbs"
difficulty: "easy"
category: "general"
---

## Question
There are 100 Light bulbs in a sequence, all kept in `OFF` state. The first person comes and toggles all the bulbs which are at position that is multiple of $1$, i.e. switch all bulbs to `ON`. The second person toggles all multiples of $2$, i.e. turn the even numbered bulbs `OFF` and leave the odd ones as is. The third person comes and toggles all multiples of $3$. This process continues till the $100^{\text{th}}$ person do their part. After this, how many bulbs are in `ON` state?

## Hint
Consider bulb number 1 and 4, how is its outcome different than the others.

## Answer
10 bulbs

## Solution

### Observation
Draw a small grid of 6x6 on a piece of paper and simulate the outcome.

Observe that each bulb is toggled as many times as many unique divisors it has.
For example, bulb number 6 has divisors [1,2,3,6], so it is toggled back and forth by person number [1,2,3,6], i.e, 4 times.

In this case, only the bulb number $1$ and $4$ are `ON` at the end of 6 steps, and they have odd number of divisors. Can it be that perfect square number have odd unique divisors?

Checking for some more numbers: 

- Divisors for $9$ are $[1,3,9]$, hence $3$ toggles
- Divisors for $16$ are $[1,2,4,8,16]$, hence $5$ toggles


Hence we form a conjecture: For perfect squared numbers, the count of unique factors is always odd.

Proof: Divisors always found in pairs. If a number $K$ is divisible by $d_1$ then we also find another divisor $d_2 = K/d_1$. The divisor count would increase by 2, unless $d_1 = d_2$ which happens exactly once for a perfect square and never for any other number.

Note that for a non-square number, the count of unique divisors are always even.

A bulb at position $K$ is toggled between `ON` / `OFF` states only by the person whose number is divisor of $K$. When $K$ is a perfect square number then the bulb will be `ON` at the end because of the odd sequence of toggling. For all the other numbers, the bulb will be `OFF` because of the even sequence of toggling.

Thus bulbs 1,4,9....81,100 are ON, at the end.

Hence 10 bulbs are on.

### Generalization

If there are $n$ bulbs in a sequence and $n$ people, then the number of bulbs that are `ON` at the end is $\lfloor \sqrt{n} \rfloor$


### Divisor Formula


Let $n$ be a positive integer and $n = p_1^{e_1} \cdot p_2^{e_2} \cdots p_k^{e_k}$ is the prime factorization of $n$

In how many different ways can we form a divisor?

Let $d$ be a divisor of $n$, $d = p_1^{a_1} \cdot p_2^{a_2} \cdots p_k^{a_k}$ where $0 \le a_i \le e_1$. 

Thus, there are $e_i + 1$ choices for each prime factor $p_i$ to be part of the divisor, indepdently for each $i$.

Thus, the total number of divisors of $n$ is given by
$$ \tau(n) = (e_1 + 1)(e_2 + 1) \cdots (e_k + 1) $$


If $n$ is a perfect square, then each $e_i$ is even, so $e_i + 1$ is odd. Therefore, the product $(e_1 + 1)(e_2 + 1) \cdots (e_k + 1)$ is odd.

