---
puzzleId: 27
title: "Cheating Husbands"
difficulty: "easy"
category: "strategy"
---

## Question
A certain town comprises of 100 married couples. Some husbands secretly cheat on their wives. All wives know about the nature of every husband except their own. When a wife concludes that her husband cheated, she kicks her husband into the street at midnight. All husbands remain silent about their secret. One day, the mayor of the town announces to the whole town that there is at least 1 cheating husband in the town. After announcement, no one talks, waiting for someone to get kicked. Till 9th night from announcement, no husband was kicked, but on the 10th night, some husbands got kicked out simultaneously. How many are they?

## Hint
What happens if only one husband cheated?

## Answer
undefined

## Solution
It must be 10 husbands kicked out.
If there was only 1 cheating husband in the town, there will be 99 women who know exactly who the cheater is. The 1 remaining woman, who is being cheated on, would have assumed there are no cheaters. But now that the mayor has confirmed that there is at least one cheater, she realizes that her own husband must be cheating on her. So her husband gets kicked on the day of the announcement.

Now let’s assume there are 2 cheaters in the town. There will be 98 women in the town who know who the 2 cheaters are. The 2 wives, who are being cheated on, would think that there is only 1 cheater in the town.  Since neither of these 2 women know that their husbands are cheaters, they both do not report their husbands in on the day of the announcement. The next day, when the 2 women see that no husband was kicked, they realize that there could only be one explanation – both their husbands are cheaters. Thus, on the second day, 2 husbands are kicked.

Through induction, it can be proved that when this logic is applied to n cheating husbands, they are all kicked on the n th day after the mayor’s announcement. Hence it must be 10 husbands kicked in our case.
